---
layout: post
title: MUSIC 255
term: 1181
subject: music
feature_image: "https://picsum.photos/2560/600?image=875"
feature_text: |
    <h2 style="color:white;"> Music History: The Romantic Century </h2>
---

Took with [Kenneth Hull](https://uwaterloo.ca/grebel/people-profiles/kenneth-hull), who just retired after this term... And there were 3 guest lectures (candidate to succeed his position). He said he has been teaching here for 40 years (that is amazing). Not too surprisingly, the successor will be teaching me [music 110](/2020/01/01/MUSIC110/) during Winter 2020.

This course is just an introduction to all types of different music at that time. Pretty good introduction. Then I realized my lack of knowledge compared to the classmates.

First, I just wanted to take a sixth course (stat 230, and not online version). Then because of the time conflicts and inability to override the class, I chose this course to be the sixth. I didn't plan to do music minor at that time... After I planned to do more music theory courses and history courses, music minor is already there!

He said he wouldn't fail you like other falculties... and yes! He didn't. I got an OK grade. The grade distribution is that simple: 3 in-class tests and a presentation. Tests should be fair if you read over the textbooks (I didn't, then I bought a second-hand version before the final...) and memorize the melodies of assigned pieces (I didn't). It would be nice if he could post the solutions of the tests afterwards...

I examined Brahms' *A German Requiem*, especially the 4th movement, which is melodic. Here are some resouces:
- [Outline](/pdfs/1181/music255/outline.pdf)
- [Presentation](/pdfs/1181/music255/post.pdf)

[Here](https://uwaterloo.ca/music/sites/ca.music/files/uploads/files/mus_255_w18_-_k._hull_-_accessible.pdf) is the outline posted on the website.
