---
term: 1201
feature_text: |
    <h2 style="background: rgb(0, 0, 0); background: rgba(0, 0, 0, 0.5); color: #FDD54F; padding: 10px;">Winter 2020</h2>
feature_image: "/back_pic/winter.jpg"
---
**Note**: This term was severely impacted by COVID-19. Classes suspended during the week March 16 to March 20. The last two weeks' lecture
were delivered online. Since there were not in-person exams, almost all the courses have to change the grading scheme.
- SE 350 made their 50% final to be 100 for all students... but sadly not CS 350 since SE doesn't need to comply with the rules of the Faculty of Mathematics. [Reddit](https://www.reddit.com/r/uwaterloo/comments/fky8qw/se_350_automatic_100_on_50_final_cs_350_possible/).
- The rules of the Faculty of Mathematics: final assessment cannot exceed 25%. As a consequence,
    - some courses gave a **mandatory** final assessment and increased the weight for other parts (pmath 365).
    - some gave an **optional** final assessment and changed other percentage accordingly.
    - since some students **didn't do midterms**, midterm weight was shifted to
        - final assessment (math 148),
        - assignments (cs 350).
        - or gave an INC.
    - or just **cancel** the final, like math 138, math 136, pmath 333. If you missed midterm, you would get INC.
    - or some courses just gave **CR/NCR**, like math 239, co 250 online...
- and... here is [*Guidance for the Faculty of Mathematics Only*](https://uwaterloo.ca/keep-learning/guidance-faculty-mathematics-only)...

**BUT**: Course instructors can elect to use CR or NCR in place of numeric grades for Winter Term 2020. Students will be able to ask to convert numeric grades to CR or NCR for a specific period after the end of Winter Term.

Sadly, some jobs' offers were rescined... including some Cali jobs...

Also, [all spring 2020 courses are online now](https://uwaterloo.ca/coronavirus/news/spring-2020-classes-online-only). Unlike in winter 2020, they will plan the course much much better and have a better scheme satisfying everyone.
