---
title: SCI 206 - The Physics of How Things Work
layout: mdtoc
---
# Motion
## Inertia
A body in motion tends to remain in motion; a body in rest tends to remain at rest.
How to describe motion?
- Position: Where you are
- Velocity: 2 parts:
    - 1.) How fast you are going (speed)
    - 2.) Which way you are going (direction)
- Acceleration: How fast your velocity is changing: Speeding up, Slowing down, Changing direction

## Newton's law
- First Law: An object that is not subject to any outside
forces moves at constant velocity, covering equal
distances in equal times along a straight line path.
- Second Law: The force exerted on an object is equal to
the product of the object’s mass times its acceleration.
The acceleration is in the same direction of the force
    - F = ma
    - Easier to move a light object than a heavy one
- Third Law: For every force that one object exerts on a
second object, there is an equal but oppositely
directed force that the second objects exerts on the
first object.

## Gravity
A man standing on the ground, not moving, no acceleration. By Newton's second law, 0 force. Does not mean no gravity. Think of all forces, there's normal force from floor pointing upwards. These two forces cancel out.

Consider falling ball. <span>&#92;(F=mg=ma \implies g=a&#92;)</span>. Acceleration independent of mass. Feather falls as fast as a lead brick.

## Energy
is ability to do work/damage. Two energy:
- potential (stored): Higher has more potential energy.
- kinetic (moving): Faster moving has more kinetic energy.

## Work
is how you transfer energy. work = force <span>&#92;(\times &#92;)</span> distance. If you are not pushing or it is not moving, then you are not working.

## Momentum
is tendency to continue moving in a certain direction. More momentum: Tend to win in collisions

Momentum = Mass <span>&#92;(\times &#92;)</span> Velocity

## Friction
How to push a block. Gravity = normal force (block not falling). Push force - friction = ma (the block accelerate)

Friction slows the motion. Push force needs to be greater than friction for motion to occur. Friction only resists the motion.

Two kinds of friction
1. Static friction: Not moving; Keeps the object in place (desk on the floor)
2. Kinetic friction: while moving

Generally static friction is bigger than kinetic hard to get the motion started

Friction force does work <span>&#92;(\to &#92;)</span> HEAT

## Circular Motion
Requires an inward force
